docs/index.rst, before:

.. CSV Importer documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Sat Sep 24 18:18:56 2011.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

django-adaptors
===============

**Django adaptor** is a tool which allow you to transform easily a CSV/XML file into a python object or a django model instance.
It is based on the django-style declarative model.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

Installation
------------

Use either ``easy_install``::

    easy_install django-adaptors

or ``pip``::

    pip install django-adaptors

CSV data
========

Basic example
-------------

Consider the following:

>>> from adaptor.model import CsvModel
>>> class MyCSvModel(CsvModel):
...     name = CharField()
...     age = IntegerField()
...     length = FloatField()
...  
...     class Meta:
...         delimiter = ";"

You declare a ``MyCsvModel`` which will match to a CSV file like this:

    Anthony;27;1.75

To import the file or any iterable object, just do:

>>> my_csv_list = MyCsvModel.import_data(data = open("my_csv_file_name.csv"))
>>> first_line = my_csv_list[0]
>>> first_line.age
27

Without an explicit declaration, data and columns are matched in the same
order::

    Anthony --> Column 0 --> Field 0 --> name
    27      --> Column 1 --> Field 1 --> age
    1.75    --> Column 2 --> Field 2 --> length

Django Model
------------

If you now want to interact with a django model, you just have to add a **dbModel** option to the class meta.

>>> from adaptor.model import CsvModel
>>> class MyCSvModel(CsvModel):
...     name = CharField()
...     age = IntegerField()
...     length = FloatField()
...
...     class Meta:
...         delimiter = ";"
...         dbModel = Person

That will automatically match to the following django model.

>>> class Person(models.Model):
...     name = CharField(max_length = 100)
...     age = IntegerField()
...     length = FloatField()

If field names of your Csv model does not match the field names of your django model, you can manage this with the match keyword:

>>> from adaptor.model import CsvModel
>>> class MyCSvModel(CsvModel):
...     fullname = CharField(match = "name")
...

If you don't want to have to re-declare a CSV model whereas the Django model already exist, use a CsvDbModel.

>>> from my_projects.models import Person
>>> from adaptor.model import CsvDbModel
>>>
>>> class MyCsvModel(CsvDbModel):
...
...     class Meta:
...        dbModel = Person
...        delimiter = ";"

*The django model should be imported in the model*

Fields
------

Fields available are:

- **IntegerField** : return an int
- **DecimalField**: return a decimal.Decimal
- **FloatField** : return a float
- **CharField** : return a string
- **DateField** : return a datetime
- **ForeignKey** : return a django model object
- **IgnoredField** : skip the value
- **ComposedKeyForeign** : return a django model object retrieve with multiple values as keys.
- **BooleanField** : return a boolean

Options :

You can give, as argument, the following options:

`row_num`

	define the position in the file for this field.
	
`match`

	define the django model name matching this field.
	If a list is defined, all the field matching will received the 		value.

`transform`

	Apply the function before returning the result.
	You can also define a function called transform_<attribute_name>.

	def transform_username(self, username):
	    return username.capitalize()
	
`prepare`

	Apply the function on the raw value (still a string).

`validator`

	A class which should implement a validate function:
	def validate(self, value):  and return a Boolean. 
	This allow to apply some business validation on the object before uploading.

`multiple`

    Allow a field to read as many values as the number of remaining data on the line.
    
`keys`

	A list of fields which composed the key. Only for **ComposedKeyForeign**.
	
`is_true`

	a function which determine when a boolean is True. Only for **BooleanField**.
    
Here is an example of a way to use the transform attribute.
>>> from adaptor.model import CsvModel
>>>
>>> class MyCsvModel(CsvModel):
>>>
>>>     user  = ForeignKey(transform = lambda user: user.username)

ForeignKey has an additional argument: 

`pk` 

	allow you to define on which value the object will be retrieved.

You can also skip a row during ``prepare``, ``transform`` or in a ``validator`` by raising a SkipRow exception.

Meta options
------------

`delimiter`

    define the delimiter of the csv file.
    If you do not set one, the sniffer will try to find one itself.

`has_header`

    Skip the first line if True.

`dbModel`

    If defined, the importer will create an instance of this model.

`silent_failure`

    If set to True, an error in a imported line will not stop the loading.

`exclude`

    CsvDbModel only. To do take into account the django field of the django model defined in this list.

`layout`

    Set it to LinearLayout ( by default ) or Tabular Layout. Modify the way your data are organised in.22
    the file. Tabular read:
        B1  B2  B3
    A1  C1  C2  C3
    A2  C4  C5  C6    --> (A1,B1,C1), (A1,B2,C2), (A1,B3,C3), (A2,B1,C4) ...
    A3  C7  C8  C9
    
`update`

	Set as a dictionnary with the 'keys' value defining the list of 'natural keys'.
	If the value is found, update instead of creating a new object.
	If the value is not found, create a new object.


Importer option
---------------

When importing data, you can add an optional argument `extra_fields` which is a string or a list.
This allow to add a value to any line of the csv file before the loading.


Grouped CSV
-----------

If you want to create more than object by line, you should use a group CSV model.
This object will create the object in the same order than the csv_models attribute provided.

`csv_models`

	list of csv model, processed in the same order than the list


USING XML
=========

The xml adaptor is using XPATH to retrieve information from the XML file.


Fields
------

Fields are the same but are called XML<FieldName>. For example, IntegerField --> XMLIntegerField.

There is 2 specifics XML field: XMLRoot and XMLEmbed.

`XMLRoot`

	 allow you to define the root XML element of your tree. If you want to retrieve multiple items, it should be set root element distinguish these items. 

`XMLEmbed`

	can be seen as an inner XMLEmbed element. Used to defined list of elements or just to organise your code better.

Supported parameters now are: prepare, transform and is_true for XMLBooleanField.
Some additionnal supported parameters are:

`path`

	required. The XPath expression to find the XML element.

`null`

	Is set to True, if the value is not found, do not raise an exception. Default is False.

`default`

        If null is set to True and no value is found, return this default value instead of None.

`attribute`

       If set, will use this attribute instead of the text value of the XML element

Meta
----

There is no meta option supported for the moment.

More samples
============

Just look at the tests.py file in the adaptor folder.

Contributing
============

Clone the repo to your local workspace then run::

    mkvirtualenv adaptors
    python setup.py develop
    pip install -r requirements.txt

and you should be able to see the tests pass by running::

    make test

Any Questions
=============

For any questions, you can contact me at csv.tresontani@gmail.com

Commit message:

Added ability to specify an alternative CSV library.

docs/index.rst, after:

.. CSV Importer documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Sat Sep 24 18:18:56 2011.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

django-adaptors
===============

**Django adaptor** is a tool which allow you to transform easily a CSV/XML file into a python object or a django model instance.
It is based on the django-style declarative model.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

Installation
------------

Use either ``easy_install``::

    easy_install django-adaptors

or ``pip``::

    pip install django-adaptors

CSV data
========

Basic example
-------------

Consider the following:

>>> from adaptor.model import CsvModel
>>> class MyCSvModel(CsvModel):
...     name = CharField()
...     age = IntegerField()
...     length = FloatField()
...  
...     class Meta:
...         delimiter = ";"

You declare a ``MyCsvModel`` which will match to a CSV file like this:

    Anthony;27;1.75

To import the file or any iterable object, just do:

>>> my_csv_list = MyCsvModel.import_data(data = open("my_csv_file_name.csv"))
>>> first_line = my_csv_list[0]
>>> first_line.age
27

Without an explicit declaration, data and columns are matched in the same
order::

    Anthony --> Column 0 --> Field 0 --> name
    27      --> Column 1 --> Field 1 --> age
    1.75    --> Column 2 --> Field 2 --> length

Django Model
------------

If you now want to interact with a django model, you just have to add a **dbModel** option to the class meta.

>>> from adaptor.model import CsvModel
>>> class MyCSvModel(CsvModel):
...     name = CharField()
...     age = IntegerField()
...     length = FloatField()
...
...     class Meta:
...         delimiter = ";"
...         dbModel = Person

That will automatically match to the following django model.

>>> class Person(models.Model):
...     name = CharField(max_length = 100)
...     age = IntegerField()
...     length = FloatField()

If field names of your Csv model does not match the field names of your django model, you can manage this with the match keyword:

>>> from adaptor.model import CsvModel
>>> class MyCSvModel(CsvModel):
...     fullname = CharField(match = "name")
...

If you don't want to have to re-declare a CSV model whereas the Django model already exist, use a CsvDbModel.

>>> from my_projects.models import Person
>>> from adaptor.model import CsvDbModel
>>>
>>> class MyCsvModel(CsvDbModel):
...
...     class Meta:
...        dbModel = Person
...        delimiter = ";"

*The django model should be imported in the model*

Fields
------

Fields available are:

- **IntegerField** : return an int
- **DecimalField**: return a decimal.Decimal
- **FloatField** : return a float
- **CharField** : return a string
- **DateField** : return a datetime
- **ForeignKey** : return a django model object
- **IgnoredField** : skip the value
- **ComposedKeyForeign** : return a django model object retrieve with multiple values as keys.
- **BooleanField** : return a boolean

Options :

You can give, as argument, the following options:

`row_num`

	define the position in the file for this field.
	
`match`

	define the django model name matching this field.
	If a list is defined, all the field matching will received the 		value.

`transform`

	Apply the function before returning the result.
	You can also define a function called transform_<attribute_name>.

	def transform_username(self, username):
	    return username.capitalize()
	
`prepare`

	Apply the function on the raw value (still a string).

`validator`

	A class which should implement a validate function:
	def validate(self, value):  and return a Boolean. 
	This allow to apply some business validation on the object before uploading.

`multiple`

    Allow a field to read as many values as the number of remaining data on the line.
    
`keys`

	A list of fields which composed the key. Only for **ComposedKeyForeign**.
	
`is_true`

	a function which determine when a boolean is True. Only for **BooleanField**.
    
Here is an example of a way to use the transform attribute.
>>> from adaptor.model import CsvModel
>>>
>>> class MyCsvModel(CsvModel):
>>>
>>>     user  = ForeignKey(transform = lambda user: user.username)

ForeignKey has an additional argument: 

`pk` 

	allow you to define on which value the object will be retrieved.

You can also skip a row during ``prepare``, ``transform`` or in a ``validator`` by raising a SkipRow exception.

Meta options
------------

`delimiter`

    define the delimiter of the csv file.
    If you do not set one, the sniffer will try to find one itself.

`has_header`

    Skip the first line if True.

`dbModel`

    If defined, the importer will create an instance of this model.

`silent_failure`

    If set to True, an error in a imported line will not stop the loading.

`exclude`

    CsvDbModel only. To do take into account the django field of the django model defined in this list.

`layout`

    Set it to LinearLayout ( by default ) or Tabular Layout. Modify the way your data are organised in.22
    the file. Tabular read:
        B1  B2  B3
    A1  C1  C2  C3
    A2  C4  C5  C6    --> (A1,B1,C1), (A1,B2,C2), (A1,B3,C3), (A2,B1,C4) ...
    A3  C7  C8  C9
    
`update`

	Set as a dictionnary with the 'keys' value defining the list of 'natural keys'.
	If the value is found, update instead of creating a new object.
	If the value is not found, create a new object.


Importer option
---------------

When importing data, you can add an optional argument `extra_fields` which is a string or a list.
This allow to add a value to any line of the csv file before the loading.


Grouped CSV
-----------

If you want to create more than object by line, you should use a group CSV model.
This object will create the object in the same order than the csv_models attribute provided.

`csv_models`

	list of csv model, processed in the same order than the list


Alternative CSV module
----------------------

By default django-adaptors uses Python standard CSV library.
You can specify an alternative CSV library with this Django settings:

    # settings.py
    ADAPTOR_CSV_MODULE = 'unicodecsv'



USING XML
=========

The xml adaptor is using XPATH to retrieve information from the XML file.


Fields
------

Fields are the same but are called XML<FieldName>. For example, IntegerField --> XMLIntegerField.

There is 2 specifics XML field: XMLRoot and XMLEmbed.

`XMLRoot`

	 allow you to define the root XML element of your tree. If you want to retrieve multiple items, it should be set root element distinguish these items. 

`XMLEmbed`

	can be seen as an inner XMLEmbed element. Used to defined list of elements or just to organise your code better.

Supported parameters now are: prepare, transform and is_true for XMLBooleanField.
Some additionnal supported parameters are:

`path`

	required. The XPath expression to find the XML element.

`null`

	Is set to True, if the value is not found, do not raise an exception. Default is False.

`default`

        If null is set to True and no value is found, return this default value instead of None.

`attribute`

       If set, will use this attribute instead of the text value of the XML element

Meta
----

There is no meta option supported for the moment.

More samples
============

Just look at the tests.py file in the adaptor folder.

Contributing
============

Clone the repo to your local workspace then run::

    mkvirtualenv adaptors
    python setup.py develop
    pip install -r requirements.txt

and you should be able to see the tests pass by running::

    make test

Any Questions
=============

For any questions, you can contact me at csv.tresontani@gmail.com
